(reflective music)
Hank Wesselman is one of the most beloved teachers
in the realm of human awakening today.
As an anthropologist with high profile credentials
to his name, Hank's awakening came unexpectedly,
as we detailed in our first interview with him.
Over time his understanding of Shamanism
and it's role amidst the indigenous and now modern
Western cultures of the world, has deepened.
Because Shamanism is based in experience and practice
rather than belief, he feels it's important for humankind
to acknowledge and embrace this wisdom.
His new book, Awakening to the Spirit World,
is one in which he talks about his relationship
with his Hawaiian Kahuna mentor, Hale Makua,
and what he was taught about the spirit world.
The first part of this conversation, Hank,
we're going to talk about the book,
Awakening to the Spirit World, and that's one
that you co-authored with Sandra Ingerman.
Ingerman, it's true.
Ingerman, yes.
And, I thought we'd go there and then,
you have another book being released, you are prolific,
another book being released in just a short period of time.
By the time this is out it will have been released
and I thought we would be able
to do a two-fer in this conversation.
Good idea.
If you don't mind.
And, one of the things, we're talking about Shamanism,
awakening the Shaman within, so people can stop running
to others for their information and start really garnering
it themselves, from their own guiding forces.
It's true, you know, there's a new form of Shamanism,
which is appearing in our time in the Western world.
You know, you don't have to live in rain forests
or the desert anymore to practice the Shaman's craft.
There's a new spiritual complex, which is coming into being
in the Western world, and at the core, at the epicenter
of this complex is the awareness that each one of us
has the ability to have the direct transcendent experience
of the sacred realms that defines the Shaman, the mystic.
Now, the Shaman, if we were to define the Shaman precisely.
There's a lot of confusion in the Western world
about the kind of work which is done by medicine people
and the kind of work done by Shamans.
This is because every Shaman is a medicine person,
but not all medicine people are Shamans.
In fact, in my experience in working with,
for example, Native American people at conferences,
most of the medicine people I've met are not Shamans.
but, they fulfill social roles more like priests,
in the sense that they're ceremonial leaders
and many of them have a great deal of knowledge
about healing using the plant medicines.
In other words, they serve as herbalistic healers.
But, medicine people tend to do their main work here
in this world and the Shaman correctly defined,
is an individual who usually discovers early in life,
that they have the ability to dream while they're awake.
Now, dreaming is something that goes on 24 hours a day.
This is something I've heard from the indigenous people
all of my life, that we're actually dreaming 24 hours a day.
Uh-hu.
It's just that most of us
are so focused on this world and the glitter
of our new gadgets that we're not aware of our dreaming.
But, the dream time of the Australian aboriginals
is the source of this world.
Everything that exists in this world, according to them,
was dreamed into existence from this dreamlike realm.
And, this is the realm in which the Shaman
does their main work, in the dream time.
So, the Shaman is a person who often discovers early in life
that they have the ability to achieve what we could call
altered states of consciousness while very much awake.
And, in these states of consciousness, they can redirect,
they can re-geography their awareness into the dreaming.
And, the first thing they discover of course,
is that the dream time and the spirit world are the same.
They know this, because the dreaming is inhabited.
Now, it's inhabited by what?
Well, you could say the spirits of nature,
the spirits of the animals, the plants, the elementals,
the spirits of discarnate human beings, dead people,
ancestors, as well as the higher organizing intelligences
who are not exactly in charge of this world,
but who are guides and those people we think of
as angels fall into this category.
And, these beings are real.
Through relationship with these beings, the Shaman
can do various things, initially on behalf of themselves
and then increasingly on behalf of others, like healing
for example, or accessing information through divination,
or empowering a person who's lost their power, things
like that, these are very useful things to be able to do.
And Shamans, as far as we know, have been doing this
for a very long period of time.
You know, I've seen
I was reading,
in this book that you have evidence that
Shamanism existed, Northern Iraq, 60,000 years ago
is one of the mumified examples covered
in what are considered the (mumbles).
The Neanderthal burials.
Uh-hu.
Covered with flowers.
There are even plaques of red ochre from South Africa
with inscribed symbols on them that look like grids,
or webs, or nets, which are 77,000 years old.
Yeah.
And, any Shaman will take one look at that symbol
and tell you exactly what it means,
because we see these things in our visionary experiences.
So, I got into this because I discovered, quite early on,
that I had this rich inner world, when I was a child,
with these rich friends who, you know, accompanied me
through childhood with childhood imaginary adventures.
I thought of them as imaginary beings.
It wasn't until I was in my 40's that they decided
to return and take a hand in things.
Yes and we've
We have.
talked about that about that in past interviews
and that was quite a stunning turn of events in your life.
It was.
And, going back to,
you were, now this distinction you made, thank you for that,
about the medicine men versus the Shaman.
In this day and age, Shamanism has often been associated
with hallucinogens or mind-altering herbs to take one
into those other realms of contact, for example,
but that is not what it is exclusively.
That is just one element of a shamanic journey.
Well, it's one element of what I think of
as the technology of transcendence.
Uh-hu.
You know, the ancestors, we could refer them to the,
as the ancestors in a generic term.
The ancestors worked all this out millenia ago.
Uh-hu.
And, they developed a very
interesting technology which allowed them to build up
their connection with this altered state
and there are many different ways of doing it.
Hallucinogens is just one of them.
Uh-hu.
There are people, you know,
for example like Graham Hancock,
who do most of their work using hallucinogens.
I don't use hallucinogens, I discovered that I can use
the drum, I can use the rattle, I can use sonic driving
to help me achieve certain brain wave states, which will
allow me to achieve this Shamanic state of consciousness.
But, dancing, holotropic breathwork.
Uh-hu.
Through the grofs.
All of it, yeah.
Singing, meditation.
Shamanic dream work is actually an archaic form
of meditation, which is very powerful.
And, I discovered by talking to a Hawaiian elder
years later, that there are three great pathways
into transcendence; meditation is one of them
and this is what I do with my Shamanic journey work.
The second is tantra.
Uh-hu.
Sexuality, it's probably the easiest way
to access transcendent states.
And, the third is suffering
Yes.
Is suffering, is trauma.
That is true, yes.
And, if you look at the way the Native Americans
conduct their vision quests, you know,
this plays a great role in achieving
those altered states of consciousness, in which they connect
with their ancestors and their spirits.
Uh-hu.
Fortunately, there are easier ways to do this now.
Well, meditation seems a little more pleasant
in that sense, well and tantra as well, but the suffering,
the pain and the suffering, I understand what you're saying
and I think anyone who has been through trauma
Uh-hu.
and painful
circumstance understands that it loosens them up
from their every day reality and frame of reference
in order to be able to open to something new.
And however, I agree with you, there has to be easier ways.
Well, biochemically, it also floods the system
with endorphins.
Yes, yes.
And, this will give you, it's like when people like to jog
and they like to exercise, they get this runner's high.
It's because their system is being flushed
with these endorphins, which allows them
to achieve light trance states, although we don't
really know very much about those in the west,
but that's changing now.
Yes.
And, when Sandra Ingerman invited me to co-author
this book with her, it gave us a real opportunity.
A real opportunity to draw on several of our colleagues,
to pull them into this endeavor to organize the book
around very specific topics and talk about the fact
that there is a kind of Western Shamanism, which has come
into being in our time, a kind of modern Shamanism.
What we've tried to do is we've tried to give it an upgrade
and this is very much in alignment with the understanding
that indigenous people have always had.
They always say that each new generation
has the responsibility to perpetuate and refresh
a continually recreated technique, even adding to and
changing the accumulating treasure of wisdom and knowledge.
Because, it was always this way that this tradition
remained vital and meaningful to those who practiced it.
And, that's what we're doing in the Western world.
You know, Shamanism is actually the birth right
of all human beings everywhere, and the Shaman
is a universal figure found in every culture in the world.
In many cultures, such as our own, Shamans
and people who practice Shamanism, tend to exist
on the fringes of society, but in many indigenous societies
the Shaman is the most important person in the tribe,
because they're the ones who form the bridge
between the transpersonal worlds of spirit
and the physical world of form and when that bridge
is formed, that's when the magic happens.
And, as all traditional people know, magic is real.
Yes, magic is real and you and Sandra,
in this book, are saying that this is
essentially our birth right as a being, as a human being.
To be able to access these parts of ourselves and the other
communication with those beyond.
Well, you know the old prophet and Shaman Black Elk,
not Wallace Black Elk, but the old Nicholas Black Elk,
the man who was the subject of the book, Black Elk Speaks.
He was a boy back in the 1870's when he went
into a deep trance in response to a coma,
when he was about 8 or 9 years old, had this
incredible vision where he was taken into the spirit world.
And, in those days people were still living
like they did in Dances with Wolves.
And, he was shown various things, like the tree of life
and the hoop of nations, and this incredible vision forms
the substance of that book, Black Elk Speaks, which has been
in print since it first came out since the 1930's.
Well, in one of his books, I think it was the second one
called, The Sacred Pipe, he recounts the story of
White Buffalo Woman in gifting the sacred prayer pipe
to the people, and as part of that story he revealed
something very interesting that I wasn't aware of.
He said, when White Buffalo Woman turned to leave
the sacred lodge that had been set up to receive her,
she stopped and she turned and she looked back
and she said, "Remember, in me there are four ages.
"In every age I shall look in on you
"and at the end I shall return."
Now, the Sioux, the Lakota, the Dakota,
that complex of plains Indian people, they all believe that
at the beginning of the four ages, a buffalo was placed in
the west and the buffalo's job is to hold back the waters.
Now, that's a very interesting thing to say.
Uh-hu.
I mean these people had never seen the ocean.
This was after the age of the floods supposedly.
This was in the mythic past.
Yes.
This happened, I, thousands of years ago.
Yes, but the lining maybe was geological mystery.
They'd never seen the ocean.
Yes.
So you know, the buffalo's job is to hold back the water
and they say that in every age, the buffalo loses one leg
and every year it loses one hair and they say that when
all four legs are gone and the buffalo is completely bald,
that the waters are gonna rush in again
and everything's gonna be destroyed.
It's gonna be the end of the cycle of ages and this
is very interesting considering we're coming
to the end of that cycle of ages, you know.
Yes.
And, everybody's concerned
about the sea level rising, you know, this is very serious.
But, on the other side of the planet, it's the Hindus.
For them it's the bull, the sacred cow,
the Dharma, the bull is the Dharma and each one of the legs
is one of the yugas.
Yeah.
And, the Hindus and the Sioux are in agreement that both
the bull and the buffalo are now standing on their last leg.
But, this is where the salvation comes in.
Black Elk revealed that with the ending
of this cycle of ages, that the primordial spirituality
would reemerge and reestablish itself and it would be
on this foundation that the next cycle would begin.
Now, this is very interesting because for the last 40 years,
since Castaneda's books came out and the work
of Michael Hall and others, there's been this incredible
resurgence of the Shaman's methodology.
Shamanism isn't really a religion, it's really a method
for making that transpersonal connection
with the sacred realms and--
Another important distinction.
It's right at the epicenter.
It's a practice.
It's right at the center
It's an experience.
of this new spiritual complex
that's coming into being.
Yes.
So, that means you don't need any priest,
you don't need any prophet or guru standing
between you and your experience of the sacred realms.
Each person becomes their own priest, their own prophet,
their own guru, receiving their revelations
from the higher source as themselves.
Which gives these transpersonal forces,
who are willing, they're sort of hovering just off stage
of the human drama, but they're willing to consulate within
and through us, and by doing so they can achieve things
which are truly life-changing.
And, I think this is a very good thing.
I do too, it's exciting and we're seeing
this reflected in popular culture as well
and certainly in entertainment.
We are fascinated with shows like The Medium,
The Mentalist, Ghost Hunters, what is the one,
something with angels, and even Heroes.
We're looking at people that have superhuman abilities,
people that have psychic abilities, when you go to
the movie theater to see anything, the preponderance
of coming attractions have to do with super humans.
Now, a lot of it is fear scenario based.
Talking about invasions from super human types of beings.
The supernatural.
And supernatural.
And, but none the less, it's showing us
this deep fascination that all of us have.
Yes.
With this mysterious unknown that has to be
part of us or we wouldn't even have the fascination.
Yeah, you remember that film they made about The Doors,
about Jim Morrison.
Uh-hu.
There was a real Shamanistic overlay into that film
throughout the entire film, 'cause right at the beginning
as he's a boy, he looks out the window
and he sees this Indian Shaman dying.
And, the Indian Shaman makes contact
with him through the eyes and you had the feeling
that there was a transmission that happened
at that moment.
Yes.
Unfortunately, Jim Morrison hadn't been initiated.
No, he got a little out of control there.
And, this is why authentic initiation is so important
and those people, for example,
who come to our training workshops.
You know, we've been doing them for over, almost 20 years.
These are many people who are in search of initiation,
because they didn't get it from their mothers
or their grandmothers or their fathers or grandfathers.
Right.
You know, they didn't get
authentic initiation and they're still in search of it, even
late in life and so, that's part of what this is all about.
And, I think we do need that.
We need a how-to guide as a species as we're awakening.
This is what the potential is and as well,
and these are what some of the challenges
or hazards may be along this journey too.
It's true.
It's important
to know both.
It's true.
Exactly, otherwise people run into the challenges
and start masking it with drug use or whatever else.
Well, you know, I used to talk about this
with a kahuna elder and we'll talk about him
in a moment.
Yes.
He was very adamant that in order to experience
authentic initiation, we have to know who we are.
We have to know who we are as well as where we are.
Those are two very important questions and most of us
here in the Western world are hypnotized by the glitter
of our little toys, our new gadgets.
You know, I sit in airport terminals a lot,
because I travel a lot and you know, I'll be sitting
in some place like the Hawaiian Airlines lounge in Honolulu.
Everybody has got one of these little things
and they're all staring at it and moving their fingers
across the face of this little thing in their hands.
Oh yes, the world brought to you in your palm.
And, here's the whole world around them
and nobody's paying attention, nobody's paying attention.
That is true.
You know, so somewhere along the line,
I think it's part of the price we paid
for our Western civilization, somewhere we lost our way.
But, both are happening at the same time.
Yes they are.
At the same time,
people are in greater and greater numbers by the day.
And we hear, of course as you do, from a lot of people
around the world are beginning to awaken
through whatever their pathway is.
And, sometimes it can be through the more challenged
and dark aspects of what's going on.
Sometimes it's through illness.
Sometimes it's by having a divine experience.
And every pathway is legitimate, but it would really be nice
to have a bit of a tour of all of these when we're
coming of age and that's what the culture's missing.
You remember Joseph Campbell and The Hero's Journey?
Uh-hu.
You know, once we accept the call, that's the first stage.
The call comes and calls comes in different forms.
You know, the call to adventure, the call to leave the known
and embark on an adventurous quest into the unknown.
That adventurous quest is within yourself,
to find out who you are and what you're doing here,
and what this is all about.
That very first stage you go into is initiation.
Yeah.
And, you cannot fake it, you can't get out of it.
There's no getting through, you've gotta get through
this one and you know, this is where people's lives
can unravel in truly spectacular ways in a very
short period of time.
True.
And, a lot of people are going through this right now.
Yes.
This is part of
the great unraveling at the end of this cycle.
So, when you're in the stage of initiation,
it's what my friend the kahuna, Hale Makua, used to call
the school of hard knocks and you know what the lesson
of the school of hard knocks is?
Tell me.
How to lose gracefully.
That is true.
That's the lesson.
And we learn along the way, that when we're in
the negative polarity, we never get a successful outcome,
you know, but that's where we learn our lessons,
our life lessons, through the negative polarity.
So, the dark has a very strong functional presence
in our lives and that's why people like Robert Bly said,
"You gotta eat your shadow and have it nourish you."
I never forgot that, he said that back in the 80's.
Yeah, oh that's brilliant.
Yeah, yeah.
Yes.
One of the other, what occurred to me in the book
that we're talking about right now, which is the awakening
of the Shamanic aspect of ourselves, is that
as you find your way along this journey,
there comes a point at which, at least for me what occurred,
was I was no longer clear as to whether I was speaking
with an outside influence or really by this time had
just begun connecting with my own true self, my own essence.
Uh-hu.
And, how does that,
where and how does that differentiation come
in the Shamanic journey?
Well, this pulls us towards the subject of my new book,
The Bowl of Light, which is about the Hawaiian elder.
Let's go there.
Well, they're kind of like
Socratic dialogues if I could be completely humble.
Yes.
You know, this man and I,
we came into relationship in 1996 and through
this relationship we had a series of dialogues over
an eight year period, which were absolutely mind blowing.
And, I've brought a lot of his shared wisdom into this book,
The Bowl of Light, with his permission that he gave me
the night before he passed.
None of us knew he was gonna pass.
He spent the last week of his life with Jill and I
and a group in Hawaii and we did ceremony for the last time
on the 26th of March and the next day
he was killed in a car accident.
And, he has given you permission just by
He'd encouraged me to bring this knowledge
to the wider world, because in coming to our gatherings
in Hawaii, Makua was very good at sharing his knowledge,
sharing his stories, but what he saw my wife and I doing is
he saw us training these western people to achieve trance,
to achieve that connection with the sacred realms
and he really didn't know how to do that,
how to train people to do what he did.
This was a man who was in constant touch with his ancestors.
I should say something about how we met,
because it's a very interesting story.
And about his background a little bit
and how others perceived him.
Well, I knew about this guy for years,
but I'd never met him, Hale Makua was a seventh generation
direct descendant of King Kamehameha and his third wife.
That was his mother's side, on his father's side
he was a seventh generation descendant of High Chief Kaoua
of Kau on the Big Island as well.
So, he was known all over Polynesia.
I wouldn't go so far as to call him the Dalai Lama,
but everyone in Polynesia knew him.
In his native Hawaii he kept a very low profile,
because of a very humble guy.
But, in 1996 I was invited to give a talk at an institute
in Hawaii and I'm just about to launch into my talk
and this big Hawaiian man comes through the door.
Now, this guy was a head taller than me, outweighed me
by 100 pounds, great big white pony tail down his back,
huge white beard down his chest, big walking stick
in front of him, elaborately carved, flashy aloha shirt
and he's got a couple of leis around his neck.
So, he comes in with a big laugh and he puts a lei
around my neck and a lei around my wife, Jill's neck.
And, this is how we met Hale Makua.
He'd come to look me over.
Grand entrance.
Now, he had read my first book, Spirit Walker,
which many of your listeners know, your watchers know,
is about my transpersonal journeys into the future
and my connection with my descendant self.
Now, this hinges on the question you've asked me,
because I didn't know it at the beginning, but what I
was doing was achieving connection with my higher self.
And, this man who lives in the future is a future self,
a future me, and the higher self is Grand Central Station.
Yes.
So, Makua knew this, because
he'd read my book and he'd come in to have a look at me.
Well, you know, one's mind can work exceedingly fast
under these circumstances.
Here's the big, this wasn't just any kahuna, this was
the big kahuna.
The big kahuna.
So, he comes in and sits down and I launch into my talk
about the transformational community, about who we are,
who all of your speakers are on your wonderful tapes,
you know, and he followed me, he followed what I was saying.
And, I spoke for about an hour and a half about the beliefs
and values and trends that Western people who are involved
in the transformational movement hold dear.
And, at the end of that time I got this feeling like
there was something that he wanted to say.
And so, I turned and I looked to him.
I didn't know what the protocol was, and he's sitting there
watching me across the room and I said, Elder Makua
I don't know what the protocol is, but I'm getting
this feeling that there's something you'd like to say.
Now, this was a man who traveled
with generations of his ancestors in spirit,
in constant attendance upon him as advisors.
And so, he smiled at me then he kind of leaned over one way
as though somebody was speaking in his ear.
Then, you kind of leaned the other way
as though somebody's speaking in this ear.
Then he smiled and he stood up
and when this man stood up, he was impressive.
He looked at me across the room and he said,
"A friend of mine sent me your book and I read it."
Silence in the room, I mean this was the moment of truth.
He said, "I read it again just to make sure I got it right
"and then, I went down to the beach and I put your book down
"in the sand and I called in the ancestors
"and we had a talk about you."
Now, I'm standing there, you know.
(laughter)
I'm really, I'm pretty nervous, you know.
I mean, you know, for starters I knew--
Yeah, what did they tell him about you.
Well, indigenous people don't like it
when outsiders trespass into their spiritual traditions.
Right.
And, my first book,
Spirit Walker, had a lot of indigenous wisdom
from Hawaii in the book.
Yes, I recall.
Spiritual wisdom.
Now, I didn't know it, but Makua's clairvoyant and
he's following everything that's going
through my mind as I'm thinking it.
And, he suddenly looked at me and he laughed and said,
"Don't worry, we Hawaiians don't write, we talk."
We talk.
"And we share what we find
"in our heart with each other.
"But, in your culture it's the tradition to write,
"so the ancestors have told me to say to you,
"in front of all these people here that,
"everything you wrote in your book is true
"and we Hawaiians need to support you.
"Keep spreading the words, you're making my job easier."
And, it's interesting it was that book,
because that book which I encourage people to read,
is quite a fascinating portrait of us in the future.
It is, I'm still getting emails from it 15 years later.
I mean, people are still reading it.
Well and maybe people are just now
embracing the fact things are changing and we might have a
very, very different looking world in the future,
than (clears throat) what we believe at this point in time
and this details it, your book details it.
Well, you know, one of the uncanny things for me,
and I have no eagle investment in this, is virtually all
of the predictions that I made in that book have come true
and just as fast as I said they would.
We're talking about climate warming.
Anyway, this was the beginning of a most interesting
friendship and Makua looked at me and said,
"We should have a meeting before you leave the island."
Now, when the big kahuna says you're gonna have a meeting.
We had our meeting right on the edge of Kilauea volcano.
Right at the edge of the crater and he chanted
and he called all of his ancestors to come.
That's when I realized that Makua was a Shaman, because
I watched him transform physically in front of my eyes.
He was using his mind and his body as a bridge
to bring his ancestors through from the realm of spirit
into the realm of form so they could witness
the conversation we had that afternoon
and that's when we got to know each other.
It was very interesting because at the end of the afternoon
Jill and I were just sitting, just kind of
in an altered state listening to this man.
Uh-hu.
This is all in the book
by the way, everything we talked about.
And, he looked at me and he said,
"I have a gift I want to give you."
And, he went over to his truck and he brought
this leafy bundle, which in Hawaii is called a pu'olo.
You whack the top off a tea plant and you pull the leaves up
to the stem and you tie them and it creates
this sort of bundle of leaves, and it was a big one.
So, you know, Jill and I are looking at
this traditional gift that he is giving us
and we opened it up and inside this bundle was a bowl.
A very simple, wooden Hawaiian bowl.
And, he looked at us and he said,
"This is your bowl of light."
He said, "Before we come into life, our oversoul,
"our higher self, what the Hawaiians call, aumakua,
"divides itself and it sends in a bowl of it's light,
"which takes up residence within us when we take
"our first breath, and then that light resides within us
"throughout our entire life, nourishing us and sustaining us
"as well as connecting us to the higher self."
It's kind of like an open mic, it's a little uncanny,
because it reveals that privacy is truly an illusion.
We're actually being monitored 24/7 by the higher self
that lives upstairs.
Absolutely.
And, I'm aware of that, sometimes I just have to laugh.
See, this comes now to the question you asked me.
So, he said to me, "You know, as we pass through life
"we step into the negative polarity and whenever we do
"it's like you put a stone in your bowl
"and some of your light goes out."
He said, "Slowly but surely a bowl of light begins
"to fill up with stones until there's almost
"no light coming out of it anymore."
And, as an aside, I remember him saying on that day,
he said, "You know, the main problem in the world today
"is that the world is being run by men who's bowls of light
"are filled with stones, they're dark warriors,
"there's no light in them anymore."
Although they would deny it, and that includes
our religious leadership as well I might add.
And so he said, "Hopefully we find out
"what we're doing before it's too late."
And he said, "Do you know what you do then?"
And, of course Jill and I are hanging on every word.
I said, what, he said, "It's simple, you take the bowl."
And, he took this wooden bowl and he turned it over.
He said, "You just dump it out."
And, with this big laugh, he loved to laugh.
And he said, "But then you start to live your life
"differently from that time forward.
"That's when you've become a spiritual warrior."
And, he used the word warrior with deliberation,
because he was a military warrior, he was in five wars.
The first was Beirut, the last was Vietnam,
where he was severely wounded through his legs and feet.
He was in the Marines, so he loved the warrior's life
and he was a spiritual warrior and he said, "Since you've
"come to that place, I can now give you
"the three kapus of the spiritual warrior."
The three directives, these are sacred directives.
They're also like restrictions, because once you're
on the path, the path that we walk on is narrow
and it's constrained by these directives.
So, I'm bracing myself and he says, "The first one is this,
"you must love all that you see with humility."
And, I'm thinking to myself, Jesus easy one first.
And of course, he's picking this up 'cause he's clairvoyant.
He laughed and he said, "I worked on that one
"for seven years, love all that you see with humility."
Because, when you come from that place of humility,
you connect with the energy of aloha.
Uh-hu.
And, that's what makes
everything possible, you cannot connect
with your spirits or your ancestors unless you're
in the state of aloha, that's the key.
Number two, we have to live all that we feel with reverence.
With reverence, and as reverence refers to respect.
And, as you know, indigenous people have
this ritual comprehension of respect,
which eludes us Westerners.
That's because for indigenous people,
the foundation stone for indigenous mind is respect.
Uh-hu, it is not so in west.
In the Western world, the foundation stone
for western mind, which is the same as colonial mind,
is dominion, is domination, and it's brought us
to the world that we're in right now, which
as we all know, is troubled, you know, things are unraveling
and rather rapidly, end of the cycle.
The third kapu, we must know what we possess
with discipline, and that includes what possesses us.
See, this is where we find our self-discipline.
And, as spiritual warriors, those people who
are spiritual seekers, who are on the path, who are on
the red road, you have to do it from a place of discipline.
You cannot, if you lose your discipline, you lose your way.
And, this is where so many of the gurus have stumbled
and seekers as well.
So, this is really our path to love with humility,
to live with reverence, and to know with self-discipline.
This is how this book, The Bowl of Light, begins.
Oh, that's how it begins.
That was the beginning of our friendship.
Well, can you give take us a little further,
tease us a bit more into the book?
Well, over the years.
A few of the things
that really jump out that would be wonderful to share.
I mean, when the book comes out we can all
take a look at it and learn the rest for ourselves,
but I'd like to know a few of the juicy bits.
Well, there's a long chapter on the ancestral mysteries,
which is virtually verbatim from him.
He talked about the fact that the ancestors
set a plan into motion in the mythic past,
which is working itself out now in our world.
A lot of us are totally unaware of this.
But, we are our ancestors.
We are our own ancestors, of course.
So, we have a stake in the action don't we?
Yeah.
Yeah, our higher self.
You know, I think of the higher self, my higher self,
when I perceive it in my moments of vision,
I don't perceive it as an angelic being with wings.
I perceive this basket made of light, with strands of light.
Uh-hu.
And it's organized
very much like a taurus or a doughnut with a shaft of light
that goes right down the middle, which is where the hole
in a doughnut is, and then all the way around.
It's like slinky, alright, remember the slinky?
Uh-hu.
With all these rings
that go all the way around.
I do.
Well each one of those circles in a slinky
is like a DVD of your former lives,
your former selves and they're all in there.
And, we can draw on this ancestral wisdom,
because we carry it within us through that probe,
that seed of light, which was seeded in us,
which we carry until we release our breath at life's end.
And then, it goes back to it's source, but it's changed.
Everything that we've done and become during life.
But, he talked about the ancestral mysteries
and he talked about the fact that the ancestors are
as he put it, they are releasing information now to us,
because the world is ready to receive it
and it's taking a very specific form
in what he called the ancestral grand plan.
And, there's a chapter called the Ancestral Grand Plan.
He said, the plan is as much of the divine
that we can understand at any one time
in our passage across eternity.
He said, initially it has to involve those elements
that will enable the expansion of humankind's consciousness.
And at all levels, see that's the work that you're doing.
That's what we're all doing here together, yes.
That's what you're putting out there.
You've created this incredible resource
with the Conscious Media Network, to allow people
to tap in to the great teachers of our time.
The expansion of consciousness of humankind.
He also said that there are certain conditions
that need to be in place before we're ready to step up
and into this spiritual heirarchy and he described
what this spiritual hierarchy is like and although
we don't like to think of the word heirarchy, because we're
democratic people in America, fact is there is a hierarchy
and we're all involved in it at different levels.
And so, he talked about the stages of the plan,
you know, those stages which are political in nature,
those which are spiritual in nature,
those which are scientific in nature,
and how each one of us finds our way into that niche
within the plan in which we can make major contributions.
So initially, the expansion of humankind's consciousness
and then secondly, becoming self-aware of who we are
and what we're actually involved in.
So, this is a very interesting chapter.
Yes.
I don't know if anything
has ever been written like this quite before.
That conversation took place in a hotel diningroom.
The Kailua Beach Hotel on the Kona Coast.
We were having margaritas and feasting from the buffet
and it was a very wonderful talk, I mean the book
is sprinkled with these talks.
He talked about the Star People as well.
And, let's talk about that.
That's a big subject right now.
Big subject, he said, you know, he asked me
about the work I do as an anthropologist and I told him
about the paleontology I do in East Africa, working with
the bones of the ancestors, digging up early man.
Ardipithecus, alright, it was a National Geographic
cover story in July in 2010, I was an excavator
on that site for the four million year old woman.
Yeah.
And, she is probably a link
between us and our ancestral ape selves, alright.
People might not like that, but
we have evidence for this now.
So, I was working with the ancestors
and this was part of the link betwen Makua and myself.
He realized that the ancestors had called me back
into the past millions of years ago and that they
were affecting me and he worked with the ancestors as well.
In talking about my work in human evolution he said,
"You know, we Polynesians have a different kind of story.
"We understand that humanity actually came from out there."
And he pointed upwards, he said, "Humanity actually came
"from the stars, we didn't come as aliens,
"we didn't come in spaceships, we came as souls,
"as seeds of light and we came in celestial canoes,
"which were made of light."
And then as an aside he would say, "You know,
"I remember what my seat number was.
"I remember who was on my right, on my left,
"above me, and below me, I remember, I remember that."
He said, "We were brought out of another dimension
"and across the universe and we came here to this planet.
"We were brought here by high guardians,
"high spiritual guardians who knew our purpose
"and our destiny.
"They brought us here because there were beings
"who were ready to receive us."
So interesting.
Alright, now I'm.
Years later he talked about the fact when you get back to
18 and a half million years ago, that's when you'll find me,
when I told him I was working at about four to six million.
Uh-hu.
Now, 18 and a half million
years ago is a period of time called the early Miocene.
I know from my paleo work, Makua didn't know this,
but I know that at that time, it was a greenhouse world.
There were no ice at the poles.
There were huge tropical forests that blanketed the earth,
all the way up to the arctic circle.
And, in these tropical forests there was
this very interesting early kind of anthropoid ape,
which we know in science as the dryopithecines.
Now, they looked actually more like monkeys,
but they lacked tails, and you'll notice
when you're in the dining room or wherever, nobody in there
is sporting a tail, at least none that we can see.
Alright, and so this was the vehicle.
These are the earliest apes and these apes diversified
across that period of time called the Miocene
and it was from that ancestral stock, this physical body,
that humanity eventually branched off
probably around six million years ago.
So, here was the ancestral stock.
Now, I'm thinking to myself, Makua couldn't know this.
You know, how did he know this,
he was just right on the mark.
And then he told me, "The guardians who brought us
"embodied as well, so that they would be here
"when we were ready to receive our knowledge
"of our purpose and our destiny."
So, he's watching me to see if I'll figure it out.
And of course, I'm starting at the skin, the fauna,
the paleofauna of the Miocene, because I realized
that if the guardians, being high beings,
were to embody here it would have to be an ascension being,
a being with a large brain, and then I suddenly had it.
The whales and the dolphins, the first modern sitations
appear in the Miocene, now we have primitive sitations
that go back to the Eocene, 50 million years ago,
like primitive primates, but the first modern whales
and dolphins appear at the same time.
And, other indigenous cultures
also validate this in their law.
In Polynesia they call the whales the record keepers.
Yes.
Yeah, they know.
And I suddenly realized that the whales and the dolphins
are the guardians who brought us here,
which reveals that to kill them, for any reason,
Oh I know.
is simply unthinkable.
I know.
So, I looked at Makua
and he's realized I've figured it out.
He said, "Bingo, you got it." and so,
Jill was with us, so I had to give her a quick rundown,
because she wasn't going on inside my head
while I was thinking about this.
So I said, the whales and the dolphins
and he said, "Yes, they're the ones."
I said, what was the knowledge that they gave us?
I said, did they give it to us yet?
He said, "Yes they have and then a lot of them are gone
"and the rest of them are just about to go,
"because their contract is up."
I said, what was the knowledge that they gave us?
And he said, "The purpose of our being here is two-fold.
"First of all, we're here to enjoy ourselves,
"with the accent on the joy, we're here to grow and increase
"and become more and evolve in the beauty
"of this beautiful planet."
"And secondly, we're to remember our divine origins,
"and this can only happen through one way,
"through the experience of love for one another."
Perfect.
Yeah that's the whole story.
So, these were the Star People, we're a Star People,
their a Star People, we were brought here.
And, we used to talk about this, because he said,
"You know, there does come a time when we come
"to the end of our time here, when we're ready to step up
"into the hierarchy and it's a tough choice."
It's a tough choice, because to do that
we have to give up our humanness.
Yes.
And so many choose
to return again and again, abort us off the path,
in service to those who are still trapped
in the illusionary world of samsara.
But, Makua himself, I mean, he was an exalted soul.
He was, you know, I've used the Dalai Lama image,
he was very much like him.
In fact, Makua sat on stage with the Dalai Lama
at the United Nations.
Hmm.
He talked at
the United Nations so he was very well traveled.
Well, what a wonderful experience for you,
who was awakening at the time, you had already awakened
into your experiences by the time you met him.
I mean, what a perfect alignment, what perfect timing
that you should have met with him just prior to his death
to have given you the permission
to take this out into the world as well.
Well, in that very first meeting,
he looked at me very seriously and said,
"I've been looking for you for a long time.
"I always knew that we would meet, I just didn't know when
"or where, but now that we have I intend to pass information
"to you and you will know how to handle this information."
So, he's given me a lot and it's by no means
all in that book, I mean that book
is kind of like a foundation of his teachings.
Are you going to continue, will you write more
in the future?
We'll see.
See how this one
is received and utilized and--
Well, I haven't, if I can say this, I seem to have
an active connection with his spirit.
Yes, I understand that.
He comes to me a lot in my dreaming
and we have conversations inside my head.
And so, I would have to talk with him about that
and see what he wants, because he gave me permission
to take it this far, and then we'll see what happens.
Yeah, you have to be respectful.
We'll release it into the world and
then it has a life of it's own.
But, there are a lot of people who are waiting
for this knowledge, because there are a lot of people
who know about my relationship with him, 'cause I've been
talking about him for 15 years.
Yes, in fact our last interview, you broached the
subject, so it must be about the time you were just thinking
about writing this book.
Yeah.
Or maybe had just started.
So, here we are a couple, two, three years later.
Well, it's my love letter to him.
Oh.
It's a story about
our friendship as well, it's been very well received
by the endorsers, you know, Ralph Metzner wrote a wonderful
endorsement, Nicki Scully, Robert Moss, The Dreamer.
Even Brooke Medicine Eagle.
The Medicine Woman, Lynn Andrews
wrote a wonderful endorsement as well.
I had dinner with her in Santa Fe
several years ago, I like her.
(laughter)
Wonderful, wild woman.
Let me ask you something, did he say anything to you
from the, about, in the formation of the Earth
and the various cosmic influences, did he ever talk to you
about the moon or the role of the moon at all?
He did.
Can you share
a little bit about that?
In Hawaiian the word for the moon is mahina
and the goddess of the moon is called Hina.
He took me to a sacred crater up on the side
of the mountain Mauna Kea, which is the mountain of vision.
Mauna Kea is the most sacred mountain in Polynesia.
The entire mountain is a temple, what the Hawaiians
call a heiau and in the bottom of this crater, which is a,
oh gosh, it's like a great big bowl up
at around the 9,000 foot level, there is a heiau
that he made and right in the center of it
is a red stone that represents Hina.
He said that the moon is the foundation of the earth.
Care to explain?
Now, what does that mean?
He didn't explain it to me.
Oh (laughs).
You know, he was well known for this,
he would sort of lay this stuff on you
and see how you took it, how you ran with it.
Well, the reason I ask is because
some of the other indigenous cultures believe
that the moon came after the earth, that the moon
is something that was, that was brought in and then began
the motion of the waters on the planet, for example and--
Well, I know, if, okay I'm gonna pull up the scientist.
I'm gonna pull up the scientist.
Without the presence of the moon there could be
no life on Earth, because the planetary surface
would be swept by winds of at least 300 miles an hour.
And, life under those circumstances would not be possible.
It's the moon that creates the mediating influence
that allows life to exist on the Earth at all.
And, Makua knew this from his mystical perspective.
Because, Hina, the goddess of the moon, is considered really
to be the mother, the mother of the Hawaiian people.
Uh-hu.
And, many people,
including the Gnostics for example, they understood
that there is a spiritual relationship between the moon,
the Earth and the sun, those are the three.
And then, all the other planets are under other influences.
We could call them aliens if you like, because they're not
from this place, they're not from Earth.
You know, you don't have to have a body to be a being
and most of these other planets do not
support life, this is the life world.
But, there's a very strong relationship between the moon,
the Earth, and the sun which is exclusive.
This is our domain and those other influences out there,
they have no power here, although they try.
Uh-hu.
He was quite adamant
about that, but you know--
Was it because
a lot of, I mean there's so much in this field right now.
Of ufology, of alien interventions, of good aliens
that are here to assist, or protect at least, from the ones
who may be trying to interfere on a negative level.
What was his overall take on the
influence of alien cultures on Earth?
Well, you know, it was very difficult to get Makua
to talk about stuff like this, because he didn't like
to go into the negative polarity, he just wouldn't go there.
He had made that decision to remain completely
in the positive polarity, in the state of aloha.
He'd emptied bowl of rocks.
All the time.
Uh-hu.
He also knew something that most of us know as well.
If you talk about these dark forces, you attract them.
Uh-hu.
You're setting up
a connecting link to them and they're drawn to you.
And that's a very profound and true point, yes.
That's one of the reasons you've got to stay in the
positive polarity, especially if you're doing healing work.
Yes.
I had one conversation
with him, which I've recorded at the end of the book.
It's a very extraordinary conversation about how we humans
are actually gods, gods in becoming.
And, the chapter is called, On Becoming Gods,
and it was part of that chapter where he accidentally
gave part of the game away and he mentioned
a category of entities called the eepa in Hawaiian.
So, I looked at him and said, who are the eepa?
And he paused and he thought for quite awhile.
Then, he came to a decision, you know,
he hadn't meant to go there, but he had.
And he said, "The 'e'epa are the deceivers.
Oh, interesting.
They're what many call
the masters of deception, the Gnostics
knew them and called them the archons.
Now, the interesting thing about the archons,
if I were to just use that word for them,
is that they're not spirits, they're mind parasites.
They're thought forms and they live in the human mind.
Are they generated by the human mind?
Not originally.
Or are they,
okay let's talk about the origin.
Not originally, they were kind of a cosmic accident
that happened as part of the creation.
You know John Lash's book, Not in His Image, discusses this.
He talks about the mythic, the mythos of the Sophia.
The Sophia, this planet is the Sophia,
it is her physical body and her spiritual form is
that milky white light with a vast intelligence and voice,
which mystics across time have all made contact with.
We all know about her.
People perceive her in their own way, for example,
Elijah the prophet when he talks about being
in the presence of the angel of the Lord,
he's not talking about a winged superhuman.
He's talking about that light, that white light, that's her.
So, in talking about the Sophia, the Gnostics talked about
a kind of cosmic accident that happened in the creation
of this planet, which is her dream, and this gave rise
to the beings called the archons, the deceivers.
Now, the archons are in the negative polarity.
They're not evil, but what they do is
they encourage human beings to err in their behavior.
And they encourage us to go in this direction.
They encourage us to go into our fears, into our doubts,
because it creates separation, that's what they do.
And, as we go more and more deeply
into the negative polarity, we reach a threshold
at some point and if we choose to step across it,
we create the realm of evil.
See, evil was not created by a war in heaven,
humans created evil, that was our great sin.
But, we had encouragement from these negative forces
called the archons, or what Makua called the deceivers.
And as such, he told me that they are the ones
who are involved and do these alien abduction experiences.
They're mimics, they're very accomplished mimics.
They're not creative, see we have creative imagination.
They don't and one of the reasons they attach to us
is they want to become us, they wanna become more like us.
I think this might have something to do
with all those hybridizations that people see in UFOs,
when they're having the alien abduction experience.
And he said, you know, the archons, the 'e'epa
take two forms, they're the small embryonic ones
with big heads and black eyes and then they're the tall,
reptilian, or insect, like ones.
And we, I'm sure you've talked about the reptilians
Oh yeah.
with people like David Icke.
I've interviewed a number of people on both, yes.
Yeah, that's who they are and they're not true spirits.
They're actually mind parasites, but once you see them
for who they are and you understand
what you're dealing with, they're done.
Interesting.
They're done.
They cannot touch you anymore.
Interesting that's a whole different take on it.
Well, it's the kahuna take and he only talked
about this with me once and when we were in privacy.
Uh-hu.
But, I did have, there is
a little section in The Bowl of Light about the 'e'epa,
about the deceivers toward the end of the book.
People will find that very interesting, I think.
I'm sure they will, because there's just such
conflicting information over all of this going on right now.
That's the archons.
Yes.
They're feeding that, that's their job to create confusion
and they can assume any form that they wish to the person
they wish to deceive, because they just reach
into that person's mind, take that image and become it.
And then mirror it back.
Well, and I think
there are some people too, where there are those who really,
their minds have been taken with this to the extent
that there is a great amount of fear within their being
that that they're living within, where as,
myself I don't see that, that's not my connection.
Yeah, I understand.
You know what I'm saying?
I do.
And I watch
where it takes people over into the negative.
And, that's not to say there aren't
vast arrays of species out there,
and vast arrays of species that have even come
and gone throughout history, technologically.
What you're talking about is something different.
What he was talking about was something different.
He said something very interesting too.
It's almost interdimensional.
He said that psychics who channel
are particularly vulnerable to them.
Interesting, okay.
This is why it's so important for psychics,
for clairvoyants to check their sources.
Uh-hu.
There are so many well intentioned people out there
with very watery boundaries, okay, they've been
very watery boundaries, they're not well protected.
And if they channel, they are vulnerable
to these entities and I think this is why
there's so much conflicting information.
There ya go, I'm sure that is part of it.
Yeah.
Now, let's go
from there to, maybe just one more, I do wanna put it
in this arena, inspirational, hopeful
bit of information coming out of this book.
Well, you know Makua was quite adamant that we actually
come into this world as Gods.
Uh-hu.
It's just that we forgot because we went through the veil.
We come into this as holy beings and we're here
working on our life lessons and we're gonna continue
to work on those life lessons until we're done here.
You know, there's just no getting out of it.
But, he said the goal in each lifetime is to remember
that holiness within us and to become a holy being
once again, before we check out.
It's about clearing the bowl of stones so you don't take 'em
back into your original field when you leave.
So, he was quite adamant on, about the fact
that we are actually gods in becoming.
And that eventually, we cross that threshold
and we walk the path towards our destiny
in a completely new way,
in a completely new and extended way.
He also said something very interesting, he said,
"You know when you align yourself with spirit's purpose."
He said there are impulses that come in with us,
which are built into our field, into our energetic field.
He said, "When you align yourself with spirit, you know,
"you're on the path to your destiny."
But, when you align yourself with what your body wants.
Okay, you're body is particularly vulnerable,
because it's motivated by desire.
Yes.
Alright.
That's when you put yourself in the hands of the fates.
That is true and a lot of times people
can't distinguish the difference.
They don't.
And that's where
the meditation and the connection and such
is just so valuable in these interesting times we're in.
That's why discrimination is essential.
Absolutely.
Yeah, if you're gonna be
a spiritual warrior, you have to be very discriminating
about the information you receive and what it means.
We're all finding our way, we're all on the path,
we're all gonna get there, it's just a question of when.
It's really beautiful when you think of it.
It is indeed and on that note, thank you again.
I'm so glad, it's interesting, speaking of the way
our beings arrange things for us, I ran into you yesterday
on the second stair on a flight of stairs.
You were coming up and I was going down.
I ran into you an hour or two later on the exact same stair,
except I was going up and you were going down
and I thought, meant to be, that's that, what are the odds.
It sounds like the guys upstairs
have taken a hand in things.
I think so and I'm very happy they did.
It's great to see you again Hank.
Thanks Regina, good on ya, blessings on your work.
To understand more about Hank's journey,
you can watch our other previous interviews with him.
You can also go to his website, sharedwisdom.com,
to check into his other previous books, most of which focus
on the need to connect with our own inner Shaman.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.
(reflective music)